
= Comments on Strategy =

- "Goodness" -

The "goodness" parameter dictates the desired quality of the shuffle.
(It might better be called "badness", since as its value increases,
the quality of the shuffle is to decrease.)  It's inversely
proportional to entropy.

Our goal is to make uncertainty decrease monotonically.  (But can we
make it decrease linearly?  And if so, how?)

In order to decrease uncertainty, we can use the "goodness" parameter
to modify different aspects of our shuffling algorithm.  Let's
consider one algorithm, and consider how it can be parametrized by
"goodness".

- Shuffling with Piles -

One technique we can use for shuffling involves using piles.
  1. Select the NUMBER OF PILES into which to divide the cards.
  1. DISTRIBUTE the cards into those piles.
  2. STACK the piles back into a single stack.

Let's discuss these in reverse.

- Stacking -

Stacking is simple.  Choose a means of ordering the piles: fixed
order, or random order.

- Distribution -

Number of cards.  One could move more than one card at a time, but I
chose to stick with just one.  The benefit of moving multiple cards at
a time was unclear, and it complicates achieving a "perfect" shuffle.

Evenness.  One could choose to distribute the cards evenly, by giving
out cards in rounds, where each pile gets a card.  Or one could do it
unevenly, without rounds.  I chose to use rounds, which makes it
easier to control the quality of the shuffle.

Order.  Assuming we use rounds for evenness of distribution, we must
still decide in which order to feed the piles.  One can use a fixed
order, or random ordering.  We'll explore those options in a bit.

So, let's summarize.  We'll distribute evenly across the piles using
either fixed or random order.  Then we'll stack the piles, again in
either fixed or random order.

- Selecting the Number of Piles -

Then, to control the degree of randomness in the shuffle, we can
modulate the number of piles.

For MINIMAL uncertainty, we want just 1 pile.  Essentially, that means
we neither distribute nor stack.  The deck remains unchanged.

For MAXIMAL uncertainty, we want 52 separate piles (or more, with some
empty!).  If we distribute in fixed order, we must stack randomly.  Or
if we distribute randomly, then we may stack in fixed order.  We must
use random order at least once, or else there's no uncertainty.
(We'll discuss how to perform that random ordering later.)

So minimal and maximal uncertainty shuffles are easy; how about
uncertainty levels IN BETWEEN?  The gist of it: fewer piles means less
uncertainty, and more piles means more.

But the increase in uncertainty is not linear.  3 piles greatly
increases the uncertainty over just 2, whereas 33 piles, say,
represents almost no difference over 32.  Also, *when* we employ
randomness (i.e. during distribution v. stacking) matters a great
deal.  Let's explore.

- Fixed distro, random stack -

If we use fixed-order distribution but then random-order stacking,
then we know exactly which cards will end up together as a group (and
in what order, besides).  Our uncertainty lies in knowing where in the
shuffled deck each group ends up.  The more piles we use, the smaller
the groups, and thus the greater the uncertainty.

As an example, consider using 4 piles.  Each pile will end up with 13
cards.  We know a priori that the first pile will contain: 2/clubs,
6/clubs, 10/clubs, etc.  The second pile: 3/clubs, 7/clubs, J/clubs,
etc.  Randomly stacking the piles gives us but 24 (4!) permutations.
And when considering each card with knowledge of only its index in the
shuffled deck, we have only 2 bits of uncertainty.  If we know which
card precedes it, in all but 4 cases we have complete certainty.

Now consider using 26 piles.  Each ends up with 2 cards, and we know
exactly which ones.  (In fact, in this case, each pile ends up with 2
cards of the same rank, with the suits being either Clubs & Hearts or
Diamonds & Spades.)  Randomly stacking the piles gives us an
astronomical number (26!) of possible permutations, but there's still
a lot we know.  When considering each card with knowledge of only its
index in the shuffled deck, there are only 26 different options.  If
we know which card precedes it, in half the cases we have complete
certainty.

When the number of piles does not evenly divide the deck, the logic
becomes a touch murkier.  Let's take the example of 39 piles (which is
still a nice "round" number when dealing in groups of 13 [per suit]).
In this case, the first 13 piles each end up with 2 cards, and the
remaining piles each get just one.  Randomly stacking the piles gives
us a whooping 39! possible permutations.  But importantly, when
considering each card with knowledge of only its index in the shuffled
deck, all that we know is that 13 of the cards won't end up at the
very bottom, and that 13 other cards won't end up at the very top.
(In other words, at two spots in the deck, we have reduced our
uncertainty by 1/4.  Elsewhere, we have near-complete uncertainty.)
If we know which card comes before, then 1/4 of the time we'll have
complete certainty.

While it's unclear (to me) exactly how much in case case, we see that
increasing the number of piles increases our uncertainty.

Now, let's consider random-order distribution with fixed-order
stacking.

- Random distro, fixed stack -

In this case, we know for each card the set of positions where it may
end up, we just don't know where within that set.  The greater the
number of piles, the larger the set of possibilities per card, and the
more uncertainty about where the card is.

Consider having 2 piles.  We know that the 2/Clubs will end up at the
bottom of one of those piles, and that it will therefore end up at one
of two positions in the shuffled deck: 26 or 52.  We also know that
the 3/Clubs will occupy whichever space 2/Clubs doesn't.  When
considering each card with knowledge only of its position in the
shuffled deck, we have one bit of uncertainty.  If we know the
identity of whichever card is 26 positions away, then we have zero
uncertainty.

With 4 piles, then each card may end up in any of 4 different
positions.  When considering just the position in the shuffled deck,
we have 2 bits of uncertainty.  If we know the identity of any card
some factor of 13 positions away, then we reduce our uncertainty by
1/4.

If we have, say, 39 piles, it gets pretty tricky again.  All that we
know is that the bottom 13 cards of the unshuffled deck will end up at
the top of some pile and therefore cannot end up at the bottom of the
shuffled deck.  So, in exactly one position (the last), we've reduced
our uncertainty by a small amount.  We also know that if we see one of
those 13 cards, then the card following it won't be from that same set
(i.e. we've reduced our options from 51 to 39).  But we have lots of
uncertainty.

- Either Case -

So, regardless of whether we use fixed distribution with random
stacking or the other way around, the number of piles impacts the
degree of uncertainty, with more piles meaning more uncertainty.  In
both cases, the uncertainty doesn't grow linearly; it's unclear to me
which of the two methods is closer to linear.

- Degrees of Randomness -

Thus far, we've talked of ordering things (whether cards into piles or
piles into a deck) "randomly", as though all means of random ordering
were equally random.  But of course this may not be the case; it is
possible to modulate the randomness of our orderings.

One way is by varying the size of the range of values from which to
make a random selection.  Suppose that if we want to re-order a
collection, we assign each item a random number *with* replacement,
and then sort by those random numbers.  If two (or more) items are
given the same random number, we maintain their original relative
ordering.  In such a scenario, the size of the range of random numbers
impacts our uncertainty.  If we use a small range, then repeats will
be common, and we'll likely maintain more of the original relative
orderings.  If the range is large, the opposite will be true.

In fact, the method I just described is logically equivalent to using
piles with _un_even distribution (i.e. no rounds) and fixed-order
stacking!  There's no rule that says we must limit ourselves to only
52 piles.  We could have arbitrarily many piles, with most of them
ending up empty (and an ever-vanishling smaller number of piles with
multiple cards).

I confess that find it somewhat difficult to reason about exactly how
much uncertainty there is when using uneven distribution, especially
when the number of piles exceeds the number of items to be sorted.

In any case, if we like, we can have optimal uncertainty in our random
orderings, too, by using random selection with*out* replacement.
Given that we're attempting to control the quality of our shuffles
using the number of piles, that's what we've chosen to do.

-EOF-
